# Final Project Proposal

**Project URL**: TODO

In this project, we are trying to build an interactive platform on emotional expression in english texts. One part that we plan to work on is explainable classification of happy moments. Understanding the factors that bring people happiness is the key to improve people’s happy experiences and overall life satisfaction. We will explore the factors related to people’s happy experiences by classifying descriptions about happy moments into categories. If we have time, we also plan to build an NLP model which can classify texts as positives or negatives and visualize the predictions.

The directly related paper came from Asai, Akari, et al who crowd-sourced the HappyDB corpus, the dataset we trained on. Their work focused less on the data analysis. Instead, they left a couple of NLP problems that can be studied with the help of the corpus for future research. Besides, existing visualizations of text sentiment analysis often focus on distinguishing between emotions but ignore the reason behind emotions. For instance, Emosaic, a tool for visualizing the emotional tone of text documents, is powerful in detecting the sentiment and highlighting the affective content of text. But there is no further explanation about what cause leads to the certain emotion. Furthermore, these existing works for solely emotion detection often visualize the model results with few explanations to model strategy. Though some of them have parameters attached with each word, it’s hard to interpret how these parameters affect the prediction result. An example tool could be sentiment viz, a tweet sentiment visualization tool. It lists v, a, and fq with no definition when the user clicks a data point. 

In our approach, what differs is that, instead of focusing on building state-of-the-art models, we will build an interactive visualization. Our platform will be highly interactive. Users can manually categorize a happy moment and then compare it to the predictions from machine learning models, such as Logistic Regression or SVM. We will also enable users to highlight important words that help them make the decision and compare them to weights of words assigned by machine learning models. By using our interactive visualizations, users will have more insights about how happiness is expressed via words. This can be trivial or meaningful depending on whether users treat this as entertainment or as an inspiration to conduct further research on it. Also, by using an attractive topic, our project can help people with no or limited related background understand the mechanism of basic NLP machine learning models. This will have meaningful educational implications.

While our team holds great faith in this project, there are still some risk factors involved. Firstly, data cleaning and preprocessing would require a lot of efforts as most of the existing datasets related to our project are kind of noisy. For example, the sentences included can be very short (2-3 words) or contain misspelled words for which the model we selected would be hard to make predictions). However, we will do careful investigations on model selection and dataset selection before we start with the actual implementation. Also regarding how to divide our time among different tasks, we now have a high level plan. Firstly, we will conduct a careful research and literature reading on the subject matter, which will take approximately 2-3 days. Then the implementation of the model and data visualizations will take roughly 2 weeks. Lastly, we will spend about 1 week to optimize and evaluate the model and of course to see how we could further improve the whole project in general and make it more interactive and interesting.

To achieve these goals, we set several checkpoints to check for success. The midterm checkpoint for our project is to have a working NLP model with high accuracy. Also, we should have developed the basic design for our static visualizations by then. In the second stage, we will add interactivity to our visualizations and aim at having an attractive as well as efficient interactive visualization to show how texts can be classified as positive or negative. If we still have time after achieving those goals, as an extension to the happy moment analysis, we will further explore how we can use machine learning models to classify positive texts and negative texts, wfor which we will use sentiment140 dataset provided in Kaggle.



**Old Proposal**
For this project, we will build a machine translation visualization tutorial. We will use RNN units unfolding to get a better understanding of what is happening at each step. After that, we plan to use visualization to clearly illustrate each step and make it more interactive.

 Based on our understanding, the existing solutions on machine translation visualizations are too hardcore for people without machine learning background to understand. Existing visualizations of RNN models are either too general or hard code for machine learning beginners. Library tutorials use plots to help explain high-level concepts but treat the training process as a black box. For instance, tutorial of tf-seq2seq model created by Google (https://google.github.io/seq2seq/) includes a gif to show the idea of encode-decode process. But this simple gif neglects details like hidden states, gate, etc., therefore is not sufficient for beginners to learn the working mechanism. Besides, there are tools specifically for visualizing RNN models. For example, Seq2Se2-Vis, a visual debugging tool for sequence-to-sequence models (http://seq2seq-vis.io/) which allows interaction with a trained seq2seq model through each stage of the translation process. However, the aim of the tool is for debugging and targets experienced users. With little text and unordered plots, the tool may fail to work beginners through the model principles.

Different from existing works, we want to make our project as a tutorial or introduction where we will clearly explain what each step does in a general form and add more attractive interactions in between. Our main target customers are these people who don’t know RNN before, but are interested in it. We define success in three levels: having a good seq2seq model, having effective visualizations for the seq2seq model, and having an engaging interactive tutorial. Based on our findings, many existing works focus on the effectiveness of their visualizations on RNN models or on seq2seq models and thus are usually hard for beginners or people who have limited or no prior knowledge in this field to read. If we can achieve those different levels of success, we believe that our deliverable can have a meaningful educational impact on RNN.

There are certainly some risks involved in our project. Specifically, there are no guarantees that the existing machine translation models are suitable for visualization tasks due to the complicated nature of their architectures. If this is the case, we will face the challenges of making substantial modifications on the existing models or even developing a new one, which could be highly time consuming and maybe unrealistic considering the time span of this project. However, we will carefully investigate and evaluate these risks before proceeding with our project. Also regarding how to divide our time among different tasks, we now have a high level plan. Firstly, we will conduct a careful research and literature reading on the subject matter, which will take approximately 1 week. Then the implementation of the model and data visualizations will take 2 to 3 weeks. Lastly, we will spend about 1 week to optimize and evaluate the model and of course to see how we could further improve the whole project in general and make it more interactive and interesting. 
